तव विलोकनाद्गोपिकाजना: प्रमदसङ्कुला: पङ्कजेक्षण ।
अमृतधारया संप्लुता इव स्तिमिततां दधुस्त्वत्पुरोगता: ॥१॥
तव विलोकनात्-	( with) Thy vision (by seeing)
गोपिका-जना:	the Gopikaas
प्रमद-सङ्कुला:	with joy overcome
पङ्कजेक्षण	O Lotus eyed One!
अमृत-धारया	by the immortal bliss downpour
संप्लुता इव	drenched as if
स्तिमिततां	motionless
दधु:-	attained
त्वत्-पुरो-गता:	by Thy in front coming
O Lotus eyed One! As the Gopikaas saw Thee and approached Thee, they were overcome with joy. They stood stupefied and motionless as if drenched in a downpour of Immortal Bliss, seeing Thee in front of them.
तदनु काचन त्वत्कराम्बुजं सपदि गृह्णती निर्विशङ्कितम् ।
घनपयोधरे सन्निधाय सा पुलकसंवृता तस्थुषी चिरम् ॥२॥
तदनु काचन	after that, one woman
त्वत्-कराम्बुजम्	Thy lotus hand
सपदि गृह्णती	suddenly holding
निर्विशङ्कितम्	without hesitation
घन-पयोधरे	on (her) heavy breasts
सन्निधाय सा	placing she
पुलक-संवृता	with horripilation all around
तस्थुषी चिरम्	stood for long
After that, one woman, suddenly took hold of Thy lotus hand and without hesitation placed it on her heavy breasts. She stood like that for a long time with all her hair standing on end.
तव विभोऽपरा कोमलं भुजं निजगलान्तरे पर्यवेष्टयत् ।
गलसमुद्गतं प्राणमारुतं प्रतिनिरुन्धतीवातिहर्षुला ॥३॥
तव विभो-	Thy O Lord!
अपरा	another woman
कोमलं भुजं	Thy tender arms
निज-गल-अन्तरे	her own neck around
पर्यवेष्टयत्	wound
गल-समुद्गतं	coming out of the throat
प्राण-मारुतं	the vital breath
प्रतिनिरुन्धति-	stopping
इव-अति-हर्षुला	as if, extremely overjoyed
Another woman extremely overjoyed, O Lord! Wound Thy tender arms around her own neck, as if stopping the vital breath coming out of her throat.
अपगतत्रपा कापि कामिनी तव मुखाम्बुजात् पूगचर्वितम् ।
प्रतिगृहय्य तद्वक्त्रपङ्कजे निदधती गता पूर्णकामताम् ॥४॥
अपगत-त्रपा	devoid of shame
कापि कामिनी	some one woman
तव	Thy
मुख-अम्बुजात्	from the lotus like mouth
पूग-चर्वितम्	betel chewed
प्रतिगृहय्य	taking
तत्-वक्त्र-पङ्कजे	(in) her lotus like mouth
निदधती गता	putting, attained
पूर्ण-कामताम्	fulfillment of all desires
One woman, devoid of all shame, from Thy lotus like mouth, taking the chewed betel, put it into her lotus like mouth. Doing so she attained the summit of fulfillment of all desires.
विकरुणो वने संविहाय मामपगतोऽसि का त्वामिह स्पृशेत् ।
इति सरोषया तावदेकया सजललोचनं वीक्षितो भवान् ॥५॥
विकरुण:	without any pity
वने संविहाय माम्-	in the forest leaving me
अपगत:-असि	having gone away
का त्वाम्-इह	which one (of us), Thee here
स्पृशेत् इति	will touch, thus (saying)
सरोषया तावत्-	resentfully then
एकया	by one (woman)
सजल-लोचनम्	with tearful eyes
वीक्षित: भवान्	were seen Thou
Who ever of us, here, will ever touch Thee who mercilessly abandoned me in the forest.' One of them resentfully said as she looked at Thee with tearful eyes.
इति मुदाऽऽकुलैर्वल्लवीजनै: सममुपागतो यामुने तटे ।
मृदुकुचाम्बरै: कल्पितासने घुसृणभासुरे पर्यशोभथा: ॥६॥
इति मुदाकुलै:-	thus with them who were overwhelmed with joy
वल्लवीजनै:	the Gopikaas
समम्-उपागत:	with them went to
यामुने तटे	the Yamunaa banks
मृदु-कुच-अम्बरै:	with the soft upper garments (scarfs)
कल्पित-आसने	prepared seat (on that)
घुसृण-भासुरे	(which was) with saffron tainted
पर्यशोभथा:	Thou shone
In this manner, Thou went to the banks of the river Yamunaa with the Gopikaas who were overwhelmed with joy. The Gopikaas prepared a seat with their saffron tainted upper clothes, on which Thou sat with all splendour and shining with glory.
कतिविधा कृपा केऽपि सर्वतो धृतदयोदया: केचिदाश्रिते ।
कतिचिदीदृशा मादृशेष्वपीत्यभिहितो भवान् वल्लवीजनै: ॥७॥
कतिविधा कृपा	of how many varieties is kindness
के-अपि सर्वत:	some (people have) for all
धृत-दयोदया:	having compassion
केचित्-आश्रिते	some people for (their) dependents
कतिचित्-ईदृशा	some (people) are such (like Thee who)
मा-दृशेषु-अपि-	on people like me even (do not have pity)
इति-अभिहित:	thus were told
भवान्	Thou
वल्लवीजनै:	by the Gopikaas
The Gopikaas told Thee 'There are so many varieties of compassion. Some people have compassion for everyone. Some have compassion for their dependents. Yet, some are such that they do not have compassion even towards those who have given up everything and fully surrendered, like me.'
अयि कुमारिका नैव शङ्क्यतां कठिनता मयि प्रेमकातरे ।
मयि तु चेतसो वोऽनुवृत्तये कृतमिदं मयेत्यूचिवान् भवान् ॥८॥
अयि कुमारिका	O dear girls!
न-एव शङ्क्यतां	do not certainly doubt
कठिनता मयि	hard heartedness in me
प्रेम-कातरे	(who is) afraid of losing your love
मयि तु	in me indeed
चेतस: व:-	your minds
अनुवृत्तये	may continuously be fixed
कृतम्-इदम्	this was done
मया-इति-	by me thus
उचिवान्	said
भवान्	Thou
Thou told them, 'O dear girls! Do not at all suspect me to be hard hearted. I am afraid of losing your love. I did this (the disappearing) so that your minds may be continuously fixed in me.'
अयि निशम्यतां जीववल्लभा: प्रियतमो जनो नेदृशो मम ।
तदिह रम्यतां रम्ययामिनीष्वनुपरोधमित्यालपो विभो ॥९॥
अयि निशम्यतां	Oh please listen
जीववल्लभा:	most dear ones
प्रियतम: जन:	more dear person
न-ईदृश: मम	is not than this (you) mine (for me)
तत्-इह रम्यतां	therefore here sport
रम्य-यामिनीषु-	in the beautiful nights
अनुपरोधम्-	without hindrance
इति-आलप:	thus said Thou
विभो	O Lord!
O most dear Ones! Please listen to me. Take it from me that there is none as dear to me as you. Therefore here on the banks of Yamunaa in the beautiful nights sport with me without any hindrance.' Thus, O Lord! Thou told them.
इति गिराधिकं मोदमेदुरैर्व्रजवधूजनै: साकमारमन् ।
कलितकौतुको रासखेलने गुरुपुरीपते पाहि मां गदात् ॥१०॥
इति गिरा-	thus by such declaration
अधिकं	even more
मोद-मेदुरै:-	filled with intense joy
व्रज-वधूजनै:	the Gopikaas of Vraja
साकम्-आरमन्	with them sporting
कलित-कौतुक:	full of enthusiasm
रास-खेलने	engaged in Raasa-leelaa
गुरुपुरीपते	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
पाहि मां गदात्	save me from ailments
Thus with such declaration the Gopikaas were even more full of intense joy. Thou then, sporting with them, full of enthusiasm engaged in Raasaleelaa. O Lord of Guruvaayur! Save me from ailments.